How do you write a "Methods Article" for MIS Quarterly?

To investigate, I wrote a script to find all the methods papers which have ever been published at the journal. These are listed under the heading "Methods Articles" in the MISQ archive online.

My search turned up 10 papers, dating back to 2015. That means that MISQ publishes methods articles at a rate of roughly 1 per year. These papers are pretty rare.

Beyond their frequency, I noticed that many papers in the set follow a basic structure, which could serve as a template for would-be submissions.

The papers (1️⃣) lay out a fundamental methodological problem (2️⃣) propose some solution to that problem and then (3️⃣) somehow evaluate or demonstrate the solution.¹ I'm going to analyze each step.

1️⃣ Lay out a fundamental problem

MISQ methods papers begin by establishing some issue. For Larsen & Bong (2015), the problem is that the same construct may have different names across different studies, which makes it hard to build cumulative knowledge. For Shin et al. (2020), the problem is that analyzing visual content on social media requires domain knowledge, manual coding, and methodological expertise. See the table for more.

Note that many of the proposed problems apply to research outside of IS and that the problems are also widely applicable to broad swathes of IS research. MISQ methods papers may pinpoint very specific methodological issues, but the issues are relevant to broad sets of papers in IS (e.g., DSR papers, or papers using multiple regression).

2️⃣ Propose some solution to the problem

Nearly all papers all propose some tool or approach for solving their problem. For example, Schecter et al. (2022) propose an estimator to address measurement error in network analysis and Compeau et al. (2022) propose a procedure for updating constructs amid technological change.

Additionally, note that the papers present techniques which are more or less fully-developed and ready to go. Many papers achieve this by extending established research streams from outside IS. For example, Shin et al. (2020) extend established work on ConvNets while Larsen & Bong (2015) extend on established work on LSA. This is a little different from CS where methods papers may make incremental progress towards a distant goal (e.g. 2010s-era NLP papers in natural language understanding). MISQ methods articles present techniques which can be usefully applied right now.

3️⃣ Evaluate or demonstrate the solution

Having introduced the problem and solution, MISQ methods articles proceed to some sort of evaluation or demonstration. You see a lot of different things here including Monte Carlo simulations, ML benchmark comparisons, case studies, and controlled experiments with real researchers. See the table for details.

¹ A few methods papers don't fit this framework. For example, Wiesche et al. (2017) is more like a literature review. But the bulk of MISQ methods papers fit this broad template.